README.md, before:

# GDELT 2.0 Doc API Client

A Python client to fetch data from the [GDELT 2.0 Doc API](https://blog.gdeltproject.org/gdelt-doc-2-0-api-debuts/).

This allows for simpler, small-scale analysis of news coverage without having to deal with the complexities of downloading and managing the raw files from S3, or working with the BigQuery export.

## Installation

`gdeltdoc` is on PyPi and is installed through pip:

```bash
pip install gdeltdoc
```

## Use

The `ArtList` and `Timeline*` query modes are supported.

```python
from gdeltdoc import GdeltDoc, Filters

f = Filters(
    keyword = "climate change",
    start_date = "2020-05-10",
    end_date = "2020-05-11"
)

gd = GdeltDoc()

# Search for articles matching the filters
articles = gd.article_search(f)

# Get a timeline of the number of articles matching the filters
timeline = gd.timeline_search("timelinevol", f)
```

### Article List

The article list mode of the API generates a list of news articles that match the filters. The client returns this as a pandas DataFrame with columns `url`, `url_mobile`, `title`, `seendate`, `socialimage`, `domain`, `language`, `sourcecountry`.

### Timeline Search

There are 5 available modes when making a timeline search:

- `timelinevol` - a timeline of the volume of news coverage matching the filters, represented as a percentage of the total news articles monitored by GDELT.
- `timelinevolraw` - similar to `timelinevol`, but has the actual number of articles and a total rather than a percentage
- `timelinelang` - similar to `timelinevol` but breaks the total articles down by published language. Each language is returned as a separate column in the DataFrame.
- `timelinesourcecountry` - similar to `timelinevol` but breaks the total articles down by the country they were published in. Each country is returned as a separate column in the DataFrame.
- `timelinetone` - a timeline of the average tone of the news coverage matching the filters. See [GDELT's documentation](https://blog.gdeltproject.org/gdelt-doc-2-0-api-debuts/) for more information about the tone metric.

### Filters

The search query passed to the API is constructed from a `gdeltdoc.Filters` object.

```python
from gdeltdoc import Filters, near, repeat

f = Filters(
    start_date = "2020-05-01",
    end_date = "2020-05-02",
    num_records = 250,
    keyword = "climate change",
    domain = ["bbc.co.uk", "nytimes.com"],
    country = ["UK", "US"],
    theme = "GENERAL_HEALTH",
    near = near(10, "airline", "carbon"),
    repeat = repeat(5, "planet")
)
```

Filters for `keyword`, `domain`, `domain_exact`, `country`, `language` and `theme` can be passed either as a single string or as a list of strings. If a list is passed, the values in the list are wrappeed in a boolean OR.

You must pass either `start_date` and `end_date`, or `timespan`

- `start_date` - The start date for the filter in YYYY-MM-DD format or as a datetime object in UTC time.
  Passing a datetime allows you to specify a time down to seconds granularity. The API officially only supports the most recent 3 months of articles. Making a request for an earlier date range may still return data, but it's not guaranteed.
- `end_date` - The end date for the filter in YYYY-MM-DD format or as a datetime object in UTC time.
- `timespan` - A timespan to search for, relative to the time of the request. Must match one of the API's timespan formats - https://blog.gdeltproject.org/gdelt-doc-2-0-api-debuts/
- `num_records` - The number of records to return. Only used in article list mode and can be up to 250.
- `keyword` - Return articles containing the exact phrase `keyword` within the article text.
- `domain` - Return articles from the specified domain. Does not require an exact match so passing "cnn.com" will match articles from `cnn.com`, `subdomain.cnn.com` and `notactuallycnn.com`.
- `domain_exact` - Similar to `domain`, but requires an exact match.
- `country` - Return articles published in a country or list of countries, formatted as the FIPS 2 letter country code.
- `language` - Return articles published in the given language, formatted as the ISO 639 language code.
- `theme` - Return articles that cover one of GDELT's GKG Themes. A full list of themes can be found [here](http://data.gdeltproject.org/api/v2/guides/LOOKUP-GKGTHEMES.TXT)
- `near` - Return articles containing words close to each other in the text. Use `near()` to construct. eg. `near = near(5, "airline", "climate")`, or `multi_near()` if you want to use multiple restrictions eg. `multi_near([(5, "airline", "crisis"), (10, "airline", "climate", "change")], method="AND")` finds "airline" and "crisis" within 5 words, and "airline", "climate", and "change" within 10 words
- `repeat` - Return articles containing a single word repeated at least a number of times. Use `repeat()` to construct. eg. `repeat =repeat(3, "environment")`, or `multi_repeat()` if you want to use multiple restrictions eg. `repeat = multi_repeat([(2, "airline"), (3, "airport")], "AND")`
- `tone` - Return articles above or below a particular tone score (ie more positive or more negative than a certain threshold). To use, specify either a greater than or less than sign and a positive or negative number (either an integer or floating point number). To find fairly positive articles, use `tone=">5"` or to search for fairly negative articles, use `tone="<-5"`
- tone_absolute - The same as `tone` but ignores the positive/negative sign and lets you search for high emotion or low emotion articles, regardless of whether they were happy or sad in tone

## Developing gdelt-doc-api

PRs & issues are very welcome!

### Setup

It's recommended to use a virtual environment for development. Set one up with

```
python -m venv venv
```

and activate it (on Mac or Linux)

```
source venv/bin/activate
```

Then install the requirements

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Tests for this package use `unittest`. Run them with

```
python -m unittest
```

If your PR adds a new feature or helper, please also add some tests

### Publishing

There's a bit of automation set up to help publish a new version of the package to PyPI,

1. Make sure the version string has been updated since the last release. This package follows semantic versioning.
2. Create a new release in the Github UI, using the new version as the release name
3. Watch as the `publish.yml` Github action builds the package and pushes it to PyPI

Commit message:

refactor: uv project, aiohttp implementation, pytest

README.md, after:

# GDELT 2.0 API Client

A Python client to fetch data from the [GDELT 2.0 API](https://gdeltproject.org/).

This allows for simpler, small-scale analysis of news coverage without having to deal with the complexities of downloading and managing the raw files from S3, or working with the BigQuery export.

The implementation has been forked from [gdeltdoc](https://github.com/alex9smith/gdelt-doc-api).

## Installation

`gdeltdoc` is on PyPi and is installed through pip:

```bash
pip install gdeltdoc
```

## Use

The `ArtList` and `Timeline*` query modes are supported.

```python
from gdeltdoc import GdeltClient, Filters

f = Filters(
    keyword = "climate change",
    start_date = "2020-05-10",
    end_date = "2020-05-11"
)

gd = GdeltClient()

# Search for articles matching the filters
articles = gd.article_search(f)

# Get a timeline of the number of articles matching the filters
timeline = gd.timeline_search("timelinevol", f)
```

### Article List

The article list mode of the API generates a list of news articles that match the filters. The client returns this as a pandas DataFrame with columns `url`, `url_mobile`, `title`, `seendate`, `socialimage`, `domain`, `language`, `sourcecountry`.

### Timeline Search

There are 5 available modes when making a timeline search:

- `timelinevol` - a timeline of the volume of news coverage matching the filters, represented as a percentage of the total news articles monitored by GDELT.
- `timelinevolraw` - similar to `timelinevol`, but has the actual number of articles and a total rather than a percentage
- `timelinelang` - similar to `timelinevol` but breaks the total articles down by published language. Each language is returned as a separate column in the DataFrame.
- `timelinesourcecountry` - similar to `timelinevol` but breaks the total articles down by the country they were published in. Each country is returned as a separate column in the DataFrame.
- `timelinetone` - a timeline of the average tone of the news coverage matching the filters. See [GDELT's documentation](https://blog.gdeltproject.org/gdelt-doc-2-0-api-debuts/) for more information about the tone metric.

### Filters

The search query passed to the API is constructed from a `gdeltdoc.Filters` object.

```python
from gdeltdoc import Filters, near, repeat

f = Filters(
    start_date = "2020-05-01",
    end_date = "2020-05-02",
    num_records = 250,
    keyword = "climate change",
    domain = ["bbc.co.uk", "nytimes.com"],
    country = ["UK", "US"],
    theme = "GENERAL_HEALTH",
    near = near(10, "airline", "carbon"),
    repeat = repeat(5, "planet")
)
```

Filters for `keyword`, `domain`, `domain_exact`, `country`, `language` and `theme` can be passed either as a single string or as a list of strings. If a list is passed, the values in the list are wrappeed in a boolean OR.

You must pass either `start_date` and `end_date`, or `timespan`

- `start_date` - The start date for the filter in YYYY-MM-DD format or as a datetime object in UTC time.
  Passing a datetime allows you to specify a time down to seconds granularity. The API officially only supports the most recent 3 months of articles. Making a request for an earlier date range may still return data, but it's not guaranteed.
- `end_date` - The end date for the filter in YYYY-MM-DD format or as a datetime object in UTC time.
- `timespan` - A timespan to search for, relative to the time of the request. Must match one of the API's timespan formats - https://blog.gdeltproject.org/gdelt-doc-2-0-api-debuts/
- `num_records` - The number of records to return. Only used in article list mode and can be up to 250.
- `keyword` - Return articles containing the exact phrase `keyword` within the article text.
- `domain` - Return articles from the specified domain. Does not require an exact match so passing "cnn.com" will match articles from `cnn.com`, `subdomain.cnn.com` and `notactuallycnn.com`.
- `domain_exact` - Similar to `domain`, but requires an exact match.
- `country` - Return articles published in a country or list of countries, formatted as the FIPS 2 letter country code.
- `language` - Return articles published in the given language, formatted as the ISO 639 language code.
- `theme` - Return articles that cover one of GDELT's GKG Themes. A full list of themes can be found [here](http://data.gdeltproject.org/api/v2/guides/LOOKUP-GKGTHEMES.TXT)
- `near` - Return articles containing words close to each other in the text. Use `near()` to construct. eg. `near = near(5, "airline", "climate")`, or `multi_near()` if you want to use multiple restrictions eg. `multi_near([(5, "airline", "crisis"), (10, "airline", "climate", "change")], method="AND")` finds "airline" and "crisis" within 5 words, and "airline", "climate", and "change" within 10 words
- `repeat` - Return articles containing a single word repeated at least a number of times. Use `repeat()` to construct. eg. `repeat =repeat(3, "environment")`, or `multi_repeat()` if you want to use multiple restrictions eg. `repeat = multi_repeat([(2, "airline"), (3, "airport")], "AND")`
- `tone` - Return articles above or below a particular tone score (ie more positive or more negative than a certain threshold). To use, specify either a greater than or less than sign and a positive or negative number (either an integer or floating point number). To find fairly positive articles, use `tone=">5"` or to search for fairly negative articles, use `tone="<-5"`
- tone_absolute - The same as `tone` but ignores the positive/negative sign and lets you search for high emotion or low emotion articles, regardless of whether they were happy or sad in tone

## Developing gdelt-client

PRs & issues are very welcome!

### Setup

It's recommended to use a virtual environment for development. Set one up with [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/)

```
uv sync
```

Tests for this package use `pytest`. Run them with

```
uv run pytest tests --cov=src/gdelt_client --cov-report=xml --cov-report=term-missing
```

If your PR adds a new feature or helper, please also add some tests

### Publishing

There's a bit of automation set up to help publish a new version of the package to PyPI,

1. Make sure the version string has been updated since the last release. This package follows semantic versioning.
2. Create a new release in the Github UI, using the new version as the release name
3. Watch as the `publish.yml` Github action builds the package and pushes it to PyPI
